# Models & abstractions

## Processes and protocols

- Protocol (in this course): Set of programs, which are executed in different
  processes

- Set of processes `p, ..., z` Pi, `|Pi| = N`
- Connected by abstracted communication channel offering guaranteed delivery
- Process is an automaton
- Protocol is a set of processes

## Execution

- Event: Each step in computation, and every act of sending/receiving a message
- Execution: Sequence of events as seen by a (hypothetical) global observer
  - Reality: Absolute sequence of events not that easy to determine, due to
    time of signal propagation
- trace = execution

## Properties (for specifying abstractions)

### Safety properties

- Nothing 'bad' has happened in the past

- A property `P` is a safety property IFF, when `P` has been violated in an
  execution `E`, there exists a prefix `E'` of `E` such that in every extension
  of `E'`, the property is violated still.

  In other words: If it is violated, then no matter the actions in the future,
  it can not be rectified

- Example: Process of buying something. Safety property: You get the item IFF
  you pay. If the shop gets the money without you getting the item, the safety
  property has been violated.


### Liveness property

- Something 'good' eventually happens

Property P can be satisfied by some extension `E^` of a given execution `E`.

### Safety & liveness

Safety or liveness alone is not useful - eg doing nothing is always safe - only
the combination of both types of properties is useful.

## Process failures

Listed in order of 'is subset of', ie crash is inner-most circle, byzantine
outermost

- Crashes
  - Assumption: Considered to be all-or-nothing. If a process consists of
    multiple modules,
    all of them crash or fail at once
    - Assumes that, if one module crashes yet its service-modules don't, a
      cleanup will take place

- Omissionn failures: Process omits certain steps (message-sending /
  receiving events), yet continues afterwards. "Messages are not sent".

- Crash-recovery failure:
  - Assumes existence of STORE/LOAD operations to write/read to a stable
    storage, where data can be retrieved from during recovery.

- Eavesdropping fault: Process exposes internal state, but operates according
  to protocol.

- Arbitrary fault (Byzantine fault): Process behaves as directed by an
  adversary, contrary to its protocol.

Focus of course: Crashes, byzantine faults


## Cryptographic abstractions

### Hash functions

- `H: {0, 1}^* -> {0, 1}^k`
- Collision-free: Difficult (virtually impossible) to find `x, x', x != x'`
  such that `H(x) = H(x')`
- Example: SHA-256

### Message authentication code (MAC)

- `authenticate(p, q, m) -> a` (only usable by `p` and `q`)
- `verifyauth(p, q, m, a) -> true/false` (only usable by `p` and `q`)
- Utilizes shared secret

Authenticity can only be verified by 'target' process `q`

- Example: HMAC-SHA256

### Digital signatures

- `sign(p, m) -> s`, only usable by process `p` (with his secret key)
- `verifysig(p, m, s) -> true/false`

- Correctness (liveness): Forall `m, p: verifysig(p, m, sign(p, m)) = true`
- Security: Forall `m, p, s: verifysig(p, m, s) = false` unless `p` has
  executed `sign(p, m) -> s` before.

Digital signatures have third-party verifiability - any 3rd party can verify
that signature was valid.

- Example: RSA, (EC)DSA

## Communication

Every process can send messages to every other process. Implementation
abstracted away, logical connectivity is a direct line between each two
processes.

### Stubborn point-to-point links

- Events:
  - `<sl.send | q, m>` message `m` sent to process `q`
  - `<sl.deliver | p, m>` message `m` received from process `p`

#### Properties

Stubborn delivery: If a correct (non-faulty) process sends a message `m` to a
process `q`, then `m` is infinitely often delivered at `q`, ensuring the
message does get there eventually. -> Liveness property

No creation: If some process `q` delivers (receives) some `m` from `p`, then
`p` has previously sent `m` to `q`. -> Safety property

Real world: Could be implemented with eg IP, plus infinite retries.

### Perfect point-to-point links

Events:
  - `<pl.send | q, m>` message `m` sent to process `q`
  - `<pl.deliver | p, m>` message `m` received from process `p`

#### Properties

Reliable delivery: If a correct (non-faulty) process `p` sends a message `m` to
`q`, then `q` eventually delivers (receives) `m`.

No creation: If process `q` delivers `m` from `p`, then `p` has sent `m` to
`q`.
  NB: Correctness not required here, if processes are assumed to only crash. If
  byzantine faults expected, this would only hold for correct processes.

At most once delivery: Every message `m` is delivered at most once, from `p` to
`q`.

### Algorithm: Implementation of perfect links (pl) from stubborn links (sl)

NB: We do not change the infinitely-many-times delivery of sl, but want to
provide pl to users of the algorithm.


```
upon init do:
  D := {}

upon <pl.send | q, m> do:
  invoke <sl.send | q, m>

upon <sl.deliver | p, m> do:
  if (m, p) not in D:
    D << (m, p)
    invoke <pl.deliver | p, m>
```

## Timing assumptions

- Asynchronous model:
  Logical time:

  ```
  p --- e1 --- e2 --->
  ```
  If e2 happened after e1 in one process, we know the sequence of events.

  ```
  p --- e1 ---------->
         \
  q ---- e2 --------->
  ```

  If we know that e1 caused e2, we know that e2 happened after e1.

  Transitivity holds too across processes, if e1 causes e2 causes e3, then e3
  happened after e1.

- Other time models exist
