# System models

Based on handout in Ilias.

- `N > 2F`: Assumption that less than half the processes have crashed. Required
  to ensure consent is possible in eg fail-silent, details later. (N total
  processes, F failed processes)

- Algorithms can be assigned to one of these models, which allows gaining
  insight into their properties.

# 3) Distributed storage / shared memory

- Storage abstractions provided by distributed processes. Cloud with N
  independent processes (Pi), acessed by clients (C).
- For simplicity: Pi = C, no distinction between processes and clients.
  Designated processes act as writing or reading clients.
- Further: Assumption that each process invokes only one operation of the
  shared register at a time, then waits before that one completes.

- Main abstraction: A shared read/write register
```
Operations:
  read() -> v
  write(v) -> ACK

Sequential implementation:
  state:
    val, initially nil

  func read()
    return val

  func write(v)
    val := v
    return ACK
```

Sequential implementation (if eg synchronized by global clock) not interesting
- interest lies in concurrent implementations.

```
p ------- write(x) --------- write(u) ------
r ------------------ read() ---------------- => clearly outputs x, first write finished, second not started
s ----------------------- read() ----------- => Output unclear, read terminated after second write started
t ------------------------------- read() --- => Output unclear, read started before second write finished

SAFE                   x    any    any
REGULAR                x     x      x
  or                   x     x      u
  or                   x     u      x
  or                   x     u      u
ATOMIC                 x     x      x
  or                   x     x      u
  or                   x     u      u
  but NOT              x     u      x

```

## Register module

```
Module register(r)

Events:
  Input:
    <r.Read>: Start reading from shared memory
    <r.Write | v>: Start writing v to shared memory

  Output:
    <r.ReadResp | v>: Response with data read
    <r.WriteResp>: ACK that write happened
```

### Liveness:
- Every operation eventually returns a response

### Safety:
- Every read operation returns the value written by the 'last write' operation,
  if no concurrent operations. (Sequential model)

### Operations:
- Every operation modeled by two events: Invocation & completion
- Def precedence: Operation o1 preceeds operation o2, if o1 completes before o1
  invokes.
- Def sequential: Operations o1 and o2 are sequential, if o1 preceeds o2 or o2
  preceeds o1.
- Def concurrent: Operations o1 and o2 are concurrent if they are not
  sequential / if neither preceeds the other.

### Register domain:
- Binary register: `{0, 1}`
- Multi-valued register

### Register types:
- (1, 1): 1 writer, 1 reader, (SRSW register)
- (1, N): 1 writer, n readers (MRSW register)
- (N, N): n writers, n readers (MRMW register)

## Semantics:

### Safe:

- A `read()` not concurrent with a write returns the value written by the
  most recent (most recent completed) write operation. (Implicitly given for
  single-writer register as only one write at once.)

- In graphic above: read2, read3 may return any value of the domain, as there
  is a concurrent write operation.

#### An unsafe register

- Implement multi-valued register from many binary registers.
- Domain D = [0, 11]
- 4 binary registers (br-0, br-1, br-2, br-3)
- Notation with function calls: `br-0.write(1)`, `mvr.read()`

Implementation:
```
MVR:
  state:
    br-0, br-1, br-2, br-3, initially 0

  func mvr.write(v):
    (b_3, b_2, b_1, b_0)_2 := v
    for i:= 0 .. 3 do:
      br-i.write(b_i)
    return ACK

  func mv.read():
    for i:= 0 .. 3 do:
      v_i := br-i.read()

    return (v_3 v_2 v_1 v_0)_2
```

Example execution:
```
Initially we store 9 = (1001)_2 (w_1)
Then we store 7 = (0111)_2 (w_2)
    - w_1 -   ------w_2 ------
br0         1   1   1   1   1
br1         0   0   1   1   1
br2         0   0   0   1   1
br3         1   1   1   1   0
```

As such there is a point in time where the register contains an unsafe (ie not
in the domain) value, which is returned by a read depending on the timing of
the read.

Classic approach: Lock memory while writing is going on. However: Introduces
additional points of failure (processes crashing), overhead, and not really
applicable in a distributed environment.

### Regular semantics

Only single-write registers.

Safety: A read() not concurrent with a write() returns the most recently
written value. Otherwise, read() returns either the most recently written value
or the concurrently written value.

### Atomic semantics

Assume values written are unique, by eg further storing process ID and timestamp.

Safety:
  1) As above
  2) If `read() -> v`, and a subsequent `read() -> w`, then `write(v)`
     preceeded `write(w)`, or `write(v)` is concurrent with `write(w)`.
     Equivalent: `writ(w)` must not proceed `write(v)`.

#### Alternative characterization with linearizability (informal)

Collapse each operation to its linearization point, which must occur between
its invocation and response, and values returned satisfy the sequential
specification of the object.

## Three dimensions

- Domain: Binary, multi-valued
- Semantics: Safe, regular, atomic
- Access: SRSW, MRSW, MRMR

Complex ones can be emulated using simple ones.


## Implementing (1, N) regular register (rr) in fail-silent model

- Fail-silent, so no global time
- Set of registers (eg 5)

```
Majority-Voting
  state:
    val
    ts  // TS in writer-time, logical clock (monotonous counter)
    wts := 0 // Writer only


  func rr.write(v):
    wts++
    send [WRITE, wts, v] to all Pi
    WAIT for [WRITE ACK] from > n/2 processes
    return ACK

  UPON [WRITE, ts', v] from w:
    val, ts := v, ts'
    send [WRITE ACK] to w


  func rr.read():
    second [READ] to all Pi
    WAIT for [READ VAL, ts', val'] from > n/2 processes
    // Must return most recent written value, so pick the one with the highest
    // ts among those returned. As majority returned their data, and writer waited
    // until data was written to majority, we know that the set of responses must
    // contain the most recently written value
    let v be value val' among the received > n/2 pairs with the highest ts
    return v
  
  UPON [READ] from r:
    send [READ VAL, ts, val] to r
```

This algorithm only works if messages via the links are ordered. Otherwise
writer must be changed to only process writes if the new ts is bigger than the
previous.

Here: Assumption that message order is preserved.
Further: Assumption that writer does not fail. If it were to fail, then
behaviour of this undefined.
